RASDRproc v0.2.3.7 -  Sep 21, 2016
==================================

RASDRproc.exe is the open-source version of the RASDR device setup and data collection program
RASDRproc_d.exe is a debug version that opens a DOS console which writes diagnostic data out

The program is able to configure RASDR2 and RASDR3 devices, set sample rates and receiver parameters.  It can optionally also display received data in time and frequency domain, I vs Q and total power.  Data collected may be saved to ASCII output files for further analysis and post-processing.


System Requirements:

1. Windows (XP or later) machine.  Dual core machines will work but a quad (or larger) core system is recommended.
2. Lime Microsystems/Myriad RF - DigiRed board with Myriad RF board ("RASDR2").
3. USB 2 or USB 3 port.
4. SARA "RASDR Radio Astronomy SDR Rx Interface" driver.


Usage:

Connect a RASDR2 device to the USB port of your computer (see the RASDR user manual for details on assigning the driver).  Double-click either RASDRproc or RASDRproc_d and wait for it to configure the device.  If you see non-zero values for "chip: rev: mask:" in the lower-left corner of the screen, it has connected to the RASDR device successfully.  Otherwise, you may still use the GUI functions to setup the configuration file.

At this point, you may press 'Start Acquisition' and observe the data collection.

When you close the program, the last set of parameters used will be written to the "RASDR.cfg" file for use next time.  RASDRproc produces annotated configuration files whose settings are described in the file itself.  It is compatible with the (un-annotated) ASCII configuration files used by RASDRviewer 1.2.2.2 and BELOW.


DC Offset Correction:

RASDRproc uses *MANUAL* DC Offset Correction.  The calibration procedure is as follows:

1) Setup the desired acquisition parameters and start data collection.  While collecting data, connect a 50ohm load to the RX of the receiver.

2) From the 'Performance Parameters' menu, select 'Tuning Parameters'.  This brings up a pop-up window where an I and Q offset is able to be entered.  While data is being collected, press the 'Use Current Averages' and observe that the values are updated. Then, press 'OK Accept Values' and see that the DC offset correction is applied.

The calibration values are saved along with the other parameters in the RASDR.cfg file.

If necessary, repeat the above procedure to compute new offsets.  Typically, it has not been seen that the offset needs to be corrected continuously, but the offset IS different each time the RASDR2 device is powered up and it does depend on what antenna system and front end electronics are connected to the RASDR RX port, as well as the sampling rate and gain settings.

NEW with v0.2.3.4:  The DC calibration can be made from the front panel.  A measure of the difference between ideal is calculated and displayed continuously according to the Mean-Square-Error formula:

MSE = ((DCOffsetI - avgI)^2 + (DCOffsetQ - avgQ)^2) / 2.0

If the MSE is < 5.0 the display will be gray
If the MSE is 5.0 < 10.0, the display will be yellow
If the MSE is > 10.0, the display will be red

The option to do automatic (continuous) DC offset calibration (that was the only option in RASDRviewer 1.2.2.2 and BELOW) is restored with a check-box in RASDRproc v0.2.3.4 and above.


Auto Restart:

RASDR2 devices when used in USB3 on marginal machines exhibit a stall acquiring data.  It has been shown that if data acquisition is stopped, then started dataflow may recover (but not always).  In those cases, the driver must be closed and re-opened, and then dataflow recovers.  This version of RASDRproc implements a detection and mitigation for this condition.  It is enabled by checking the 'Auto Restart' tick box in the upper right corner near the frame rate display.

In addition, this version annotates the data rate and frame rate display with a comparision to the expected rates and uses a RED or YELLOW background if the program is not keeping up.  The thresholds are fixed at compile time at the moment.

With v0.2.3.6, some aspects of this have changed.  Users have reported random application crashes and these appear to be related to thread-safety issues which are endemic in the code architecture.  A small amount of safety w/r/t the access to the endpoint data structures and the CyUSB library was put into place, and it seems to have a positive effect upon the liklihood of an application crash when stopping.  I have a low-spec development system in which USB3 operation is extremely marginal, calling for frequent resets of the USB device.


Gain, Bandwidth and LNA Selection:

With v0.2.3.7, some aspects of this have changed.  Changing gain values for the VGA and LNA as well as the LPF filter bandwidth now takes place immediately upon selection.  I.e. it is not required to 'Apply' which would cause an acquisition stop, configure and acquisition start cycle.  The only setting that requires an 'Apply' is the changing of the 'RF Ctr Freq' (and that is only due to more complex GUI issues than any actual restriction in the LMS6002D).  The 'Apply' button has been moved and renamed to be near the entry field.

Further, with v0.2.3.7, the ability to select which LNA port is active on the LMS6002D chip is available.  However, testing has shown that LNA1 is the only viable port; LNA3 does not appear to provide a useful response in tests conducted at 408MHz (even though it *should*).  Additionally, the RX->LNA switching that is available on the DigiRed board is now exposed.  This means that the user can disconnect the LMS6002D from the RX input to measure internal system behavior.  NOTE: it does not provide a 50ohm input to the LNA, rather it provides a Hi-Z.  This is the way that the circuit is wired on the DigiRed, and identifies an area of inprovement in the next design.

The bottom row status is updated to provide additional details on the specification of the input selected.


Radio Sky Spectrograph Integration:

This version supports a TCP/IP connection to allow Radio Sky Spectrograph to manage the display of a waterfall.  The protocol is described here:
http://cygnusa.blogspot.com/2015/07/how-to-talk-to-radio-sky-spectrograph.html

in RASDRproc the TCP/IP server, if enabled, will be active during periods of active acquisition (after pressing 'Start Acquisition').  In RSS, you tell it to use the 'RTL Dongle Receiver' under the Radio menu.  The connection is established by RSS when you press 'Start' on its GUI.  If you change certain parameters in RASDRproc or otherwise affect the frequency plan, the connection will disconnect and you can re-start by 'Start' on the RSS screen.  It seems to be pretty robust.  Please do make sure that RASDRproc RSS output is enabled and acquiring data *first* before pressing 'Start' on RSS.  Otherwise, it may take some time for it to timeout.

The RSS control panel (in RASDRproc Define Output->Setup RSS Output menu) has several tunable parameters:

- Channel Offset
- Channel Gain
- Channel Bias

These affect the calculation of the spectrum output as follows:  S[n] = (( s[n] + offset ) * gain ) + bias

- Minimum Value (clip)
- Maximum value (clip)

These will enforce the spectral outputs to limit values

- Frequency Offset

This can be used if you are using an upconverter to provide the correct offset frequency so that RSS will display the actual RF frequency instead of the IF frequency that the RASDR unit is tuned to.  NOTE: by rights, this is needed to be known by RASDRproc itself, but so far it was not implemented that way.  In the future this control may move to a different place, but for now it is listed here with the RSS stuff.

There was a regression in v0.2.3.4 in which the RSS control panel settings became unavailable.  This was corrected in v0.2.3.5 (and hopefully from now on). 


Known Issues:

1) The program will give an ugly dialog box if it cannot find its settings file 'RASDR.cfg', but will create a new one when the program exits.

2) When using USB 3 on a marginal machine (e.g. dual core, 4GB RAM) the application is known to stop acquiring data.  With the updated Cypress WHQL driver, this condition can be cleared by manually stopping then restarting acquisition.  It is not yet understood why this occurs.  This behavior has not been observed on a more robust machine (e.g. quad core, 8GB RAM).  The working theory at this point is that RASDRviewer/RASDRproc and its use of the Cypress driver API requires two cores to itself and OS activity can interfere with the timing of completion requests for USB buffers.

One very strong driver of this condtion was the use of burst mode transfer for USB3 super speed.  When the burst length is set to 1, the effect it has on a lower spec machine is dramatic.  Unfortunately, it was not the only thing needed, and in some rare cases a glitch was still observed to occur.  For this reason, a workaround was found to allow data to keep being collected.

3) Scaling of the frequency plot, the use of markers and other aspects of the UI can produce unsatisfactory results.  Please be persistent in your efforts to make the plot look they way you want it.  RASDRproc v0.2.2.1 has for all intents and purposes solved the issues with the Power Plot.  Please let us know if you find a behavior that is unsatisfactory.

4) "RASDRproc.exe", if started w/o a RASDR device connection may take a very long time to start.  This does not seem to be the case with "RASDRproc_d.exe"

5) Sometimes when restarting (or if Auto Restart) is enabled, the program will raise an exception in the CCyUSBEndPoint::FinishDataXfer() as it deletes buffers.  This is when the stop is initiated by a call to LMLL_Testing_StopSdramRead() to stop collecting data from the USB stream.

Debugging this has identified thread safety issues due to concurrent access to the endpoint functions exposed by the CyUSB API.  An attempt at addressing these had been made in v0.2.3.6 and field testing is in progress.

6) If choosing a high sample rate with a lot of integration, please be patient for the FFT spectrum window.  The first spectra will not be available until after the first integration time is complete.  You can estimate the ETA by observing the frame rate and dividing that from the 'average over frames' value.

7) When using FFT plot markers, the font is not a fixed-width font, and so when there is a '1' displayed, the string shifts around and is distracting.  Need to figure out how to create and use a fixed-width font instead.  Some references:
https://www.opengl.org/archives/resources/features/fontsurvey/#tmt
http://diyhpl.us/~bryan/irc/darpa/avm/meta/meta/QRG/code-library/lisp/opengl/_devel/glfont2/glfont.htm

8) If attempting to run RASDRproc on a machine via remote desktop, it can fail due to an OpenGL context not being available.  With v0.2.3.7, hopefully this will result in an informative message.  There should not be a reason why an OpenGL application cannot operate the same regardless of whether it is started on the console or via a remote desktop connection.  If the application is *already running*, there seems to be no problem with operating over remote desktop...

9) LNA3 (which is now available to be used) does not seem to provide any meaningful response in the system.
